[docs] example using kueue (#5498)
skypilot-org/skypilot: docs/source/reference/kubernetes/examples/kueue-example.rst

.. _kubernetes-example-kueue:

Using SkyPilot with Kueue
=========================

Kueue is an open source Kubernetes job scheduler.
This example shows how SkyPilot can be usedwith Kueue to schedule jobs on Kubernetes.

Install Kueue
-------------

This example assumes a Kubernetes cluster is already set up.

To install Kueue, run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    # See https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases for available versions.
    VERSION=v0.11.4
    kubectl apply --server-side -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/download/$VERSION/manifests.yaml

Kueue does not support scheduling plain pods out of the box. Since SkyPilot creates and manages workloads as pods,
Kueue config needs to be patched to support plain pods.

.. code-block:: bash

>     # Extract and patch the config nd save it to /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Extract and patch the config and save it to /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml
```

    # This is required because SkyPilot creates and manages workloads as pods
    kubectl -n kueue-system get cm kueue-manager-config -o jsonpath={.data.controller_manager_config\\.yaml} | yq '.integrations.frameworks += ["pod"]' > /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml
    # Apply the changes from /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml created above
    kubectl -n kueue-system create cm kueue-manager-config --from_file=controller_manager_config.yaml=/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl -n kueue-system apply -f -
    # Restart the kueue-controller-manager pod with the following command
    kubectl -n kueue-system rollout restart deployment kueue-controller-manager
    # Wait for the restart to complete
    kubectl -n kueue-system rollout status deployment kueue-controller-manager

Create multiple namespaces
--------------------------

Multiple teams may share the same Kubernetes cluster under their own namespaces.
To simulate this, two namespaces are created: ``team1`` and ``team2``.

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl create namespace team1
    kubectl create namespace team2

> Create a kueue resource flavor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Kueue resource flavor
```
May need to patch https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/blob/007c2e532e298f412319e6241d5f243e947689a5/docs/source/extension/linting.py#L6-L7
Applies to other headers as well

.. _kubernetes-example-kueue:

Using SkyPilot with Kueue
=========================

Kueue is an open source Kubernetes job scheduler.
This example shows how SkyPilot can be used with Kueue to schedule jobs on Kubernetes.

In this example, we explore a use case where two teams share one Kubernetes cluster:

- Each team would like to host their own SkyPilot API server to submit jobs to.
- Each team would like to have their own job queue with independent quota and priority.

The example below walks through the steps to set up SkyPilot API servers and Kueue in the following architecture:

.. image:: ../../../images/examples/k8s-with-kueue/final-architecture.svg
   :alt: Kueue Example Architecture
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

Prerequisites
-------------

* A Kubernetes cluster with LoadBalancer or NodePort service support
* `Helm <https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/>`_

> * `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/>`_

Reviewer: also yq

Install Kueue
-------------

This example assumes a Kubernetes cluster is already set up.

To install Kueue, run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    # See https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases for available versions.
    VERSION=v0.11.4
    kubectl apply --server-side -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/download/$VERSION/manifests.yaml

Kueue does not support scheduling plain pods out of the box. Since SkyPilot creates and manages workloads as pods,

> Kueue config needs to be patched to support plain pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Kueue config needs to be patched to support plain pods.
```

.. code-block:: bash

    # Extract and patch the config and save it to /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml
    # This is required because SkyPilot creates and manages workloads as pods
    kubectl -n kueue-system get cm kueue-manager-config -o jsonpath={.data.controller_manager_config\\.yaml} | yq '.integrations.frameworks += ["pod"]' > /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml
    # Apply the changes from /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml created above

>     kubectl -n kueue-system create cm kueue-manager-config --from_file=controller_manager_config.yaml=/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl -n kueue-system apply -f -

Reviewer: wait, why can't we just `apply` here? the `create --dry-run | apply` thing is weird

Author: I tried applying `/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml`, and it returns the following message:
```
error: resource mapping not found for name: "" namespace: "" from "/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml": no matches for kind "Configuration" in version "config.kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1"
ensure CRDs are installed first
```
Inspecting both the `/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml` and the generated yaml from the command, the `/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml` has `kind: Configuration` whereas the generated yaml has `kind: ConfigMap` - so I think the command is just trying to create a configmap from the file.

Author: Modifying the comment above the line to say
```
# Create an updated ConfigMap from /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml and apply the changes
```

Reviewer: Can we just do `kubectl -n kueue-system create cm kueue-manage-config --from-file=blahblah`, without the `--dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl -n kueue-system apply -f -`?

    # Restart the kueue-controller-manager pod with the following command
    kubectl -n kueue-system rollout restart deployment kueue-controller-manager
    # Wait for the restart to complete
    kubectl -n kueue-system rollout status deployment kueue-controller-manager

Create team namespaces
----------------------

To simulate multiple teams sharing the same Kubernetes cluster,
two namespaces are created: ``team1`` and ``team2``.

.. image:: ../../../images/examples/k8s-with-kueue/namespaces.svg
   :alt: Team Namespaces
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl create namespace team1
    kubectl create namespace team2

Create a Kueue resource flavor
------------------------------

A ResourceFlavor is an object that represents resource variations (such as CPU architecture, GPU type, etc.)

> and allows you to associate them with cluster nodes through labels, taints and tolerations.

Reviewer: Explain how we are using the ResourceFlavor and why we need it.

Author: I think application for anything other than default ResourceFlavor is pretty advanced, so I left some links for people to read up on if more interested but left it at that.

Reviewer: Sure, but why is it needed at all? What is `default-flavor`? Must we have this in order to create a queue?

Reviewer: Maybe we can paraphrase https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/resource_flavor/#empty-resourceflavor

Author: Added a snippet on it, lmk what you think

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl apply -f kueue-resource-flavor.yaml

Create a Kueue admission check
------------------------------

By default, Kueue will admit all pods that fits within the cluster queue's resource quota.
However, there may be cases where the underlying cluster does not have the necessary resources,
regardless of the quota.

To address this, an admission check is created to check if the necessary resources are available
in the underlying cluster.

``kueue-admission-check.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: AdmissionCheck
    metadata:
      name: skypilot-kueue-prov
    spec:
      controllerName: kueue.x-k8s.io/provisioning-request
      parameters:
        apiGroup: kueue.x-k8s.io
        kind: ProvisioningRequestConfig
        name: skypilot-kueue-config
    ---
    apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: ProvisioningRequestConfig
    metadata:
      name: skypilot-kueue-config
    spec:
      provisioningClassName: check-capacity.autoscaling.x-k8s.io
      managedResources:
      - nvidia.com/gpu
      - cpu
      - memory

> The ``ProvisioningClassConfig`` above uses ``ProvisioningClassName`` of ``check-capacity.autoscaling.x.k8s-io``.

Reviewer: Is `check-capacity.autoscaling.x.k8s-io` an arbitrary value, or some predefined class that we can use out of the box?

Author: it's the latter, adding a link here to https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#supported-provisioningclasses where the two out of the box provisioningclasses are defined.

This ProvisioningClass checks if necessary resources are available in the underlying cluster, and will attempt to
provision them via an autoscaler if one is available.

Different cloud providers may provide their own ``ProvisioningClassName`` for their own autoscalers.

> For example, GKE provides ``queued-provisioning.gke.io`` which integrates with GKE autoscaling node pools.

Reviewer: How do I know if I need to do this or if I can just use the `check-capacity.autoscaling.x.k8s-io` one? Is there a table somewhere? How did you find `queued-provisioning.gke.io`?

Author: Honestly, I only found because I was looking at this SkyPilot + Kueue tutorial that was written by GKE people (https://gke-ai-labs.dev/docs/tutorials/skypilot/resource-management-using-kueue/), and they happened mention it there. There is no centralized table of provisioningClass I could find.

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl apply -f kueue-admission-check.yaml

Create cluster queues and local queues
--------------------------------------

Kueue has a two level hierarchy: cluster queues and local queues.

A cluster queue is a Kueue resource that defines the resource quota and admission checks.
A cluster queue is shared across all namespaces.

A local queue is a Kueue resource that defines the resource quota for a namespace.
A local queue is created in a namespace and is only applicable to that namespace.
A local queue points to a cluster queue. Multiple local queues can point to the same cluster queue.

Here, we create a cluster queue and two local queues, one for each team.

``kueue-one-cluster-queue.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: ClusterQueue
    metadata:
      name: "skypilot-cluster-queue"
    spec:
      namespaceSelector: {} # match all namespaces
      resourceGroups:
      - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "nvidia.com/gpu"]
        flavors:
        - name: "default-flavor"

>           # Adjust this value based on actual resource needs instead of "Infinite"

Reviewer: Do I have to? If I have the admission check, is it fine to just leave them infinite? If yes, can I alternatively omit the quotas altogether rather than make them "infinite"?

Author: I tried specifying just CPUs, and I run into this fun message:
```
The ClusterQueue "skypilot-cluster-queue-team1" is invalid: spec.resourceGroups[0]: Invalid value: "object": flavors must have the same number of resources as the coveredResources
```
so yea, it does seems like I need to specify everything I specify in `coveredResources`.

Author: Added come comments in two queue example to better explain how to define quotas

      namespace: "team2"
      name: "skypilot-local-queue-team2"
    spec:
      clusterQueue: "skypilot-cluster-queue-team2"

In this setup, the two namespaces ``team1`` and ``team2`` have their own separate cluster queues.
Now, each team has their own quotas, and jobs from each team are ordered by their priority independently.

.. image:: ../../../images/examples/k8s-with-kueue/two-queues.svg
   :alt: Two Cluster Queues Architecture
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

To create the cluster and local queues above, save the snippet to ``kueue-two-cluster-queues.yaml`` and run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl apply -f kueue-two-cluster-queues.yaml

.. tip::

    To configure the interaction between multiple cluster queues, refer to `Kueue documentation on cohorts <https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/cohort/>`_.

Deploy SkyPilot API servers
---------------------------

In this example, two SkyPilot API servers are deployed to the cluster so that each team interacts with their own SkyPilot API server.

You can deploy SkyPilot API servers by following the steps in :ref:`Kubernetes Deployment Guide <sky-api-server-deploy>` twice,

> using ``team1`` and ``team2`` as the ``$NAMESPACE`` variable respectively.

Author: Following my own tutorial, this part doesn't work when setting up the SkyPilot API server for `team2` namespace once the API server for `team1` namespace is set up:
```
Error: Unable to continue with install: ClusterRole "skypilot-ingress-nginx" in namespace "" exists and cannot be imported into the current release: invalid ownership metadata; annotation validation error: key "meta.helm.sh/release-namespace" must equal "team2": current value is "team1"
```

Author: Reproduced this issue in isolation, filed an issue https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/issues/5508

Author: Modified the docs to make the tutorial work when deploying multiple API servers on the same cluster

    VERSION=v0.11.4
    kubectl apply --server-side -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/download/$VERSION/manifests.yaml

Patch Kueue to support plain pods
---------------------------------

Kueue does not support scheduling plain pods out of the box. Since SkyPilot creates and manages workloads as pods,

> the kueue config needs to be patched to support plain pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Kueue config needs to be patched to support plain pods.
```

.. code-block:: bash

    # Extract and patch the config and save it to /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml
    # This is required because SkyPilot creates and manages workloads as pods
    kubectl -n kueue-system get cm kueue-manager-config -o jsonpath={.data.controller_manager_config\\.yaml} | yq '.integrations.frameworks += ["pod"]' > /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml
    # Create an updated ConfigMap from /tmp/kueueconfig.yaml and apply the changes
    kubectl -n kueue-system create cm kueue-manager-config --from_file=controller_manager_config.yaml=/tmp/kueueconfig.yaml --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl -n kueue-system apply -f -
    # Restart the kueue-controller-manager pod with the following command
    kubectl -n kueue-system rollout restart deployment kueue-controller-manager
    # Wait for the restart to complete
    kubectl -n kueue-system rollout status deployment kueue-controller-manager

Check that the patch is applied by running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl -n kueue-system get cm kueue-manager-config -o jsonpath={.data.controller_manager_config\\.yaml} | yq '.integrations.frameworks'

This should output:

.. code-block:: bash

    ...
    - pod

> Create a namespace

Reviewer: this section doesn't really makes sense with only one team/queue
What namespace is used by skypilot by default? Should we just be using that? Then it doesn't need to be created.

Author: yeah the skypilot API server helm chart is run with `--create-namespace` flag so there is no longer a need to explicitly create the namespace

------------------

To simulate a team sharing the same Kubernetes cluster,
a namespace is created: ``skypilot``.

.. image:: ../../../images/examples/k8s-with-kueue/namespace.svg
   :alt: K8s cluster with a namespace
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl create namespace skypilot

> Deploy a SkyPilot API server

Reviewer: Similarly, do we even need to explicitly do this in the single-queue case? It's kind of orthogonal now. You could even do this with a local API server

Author: yeah, removed the deployment step

    spec:
      clusterQueue: "skypilot-cluster-queue"

To create the cluster and local queues above, save the snippet to ``kueue.yaml`` and run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    # if 'skypilot' namespace does not exist, create it
    kubectl create namespace skypilot
    # create the cluster and local queue
    kubectl apply -f kueue.yaml

> The team submits jobs to the local queue ``skypilot-local-queue``.
> The jobs from the team are subject to the quota defined in the cluster queue,
> and the jobs from the team are ordered by their priority.

Reviewer: I know I already commented on this but it still feels weird.
We can just omit "team" altogether.
```suggestion
Now, jobs can be submitted to the local queue ``skypilot-local-queue``.
Jobs are subject to the quota defined in the cluster queue,
and the jobs are ordered by their priority.
```

    kind: LocalQueue
    metadata:
      # A local queue is in a namespace
      namespace: "skypilot"
      name: "skypilot-local-queue"
    spec:
      clusterQueue: "skypilot-cluster-queue"

> The team submit their jobs to the local queue ``skypilot-local-queue``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The team submits jobs to the local queue ``skypilot-local-queue``.
```

> The jobs from the team are subject to the same quota defined in the cluster queue,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The jobs from the team are subject to the quota defined in the cluster queue,
```

> and the jobs from the team are ordered by their priority together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the jobs from the team are ordered by their priority.
```

Refer to :ref:`Setting the SkyPilot config <sky-api-server-config>` section of the Kubernetes Deployment Guide
for instructions on how to set the config file on a helm-deployed SkyPilot API server.

The following config should be set on the API server:

``skypilot-config.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    kubernetes:
      pod_config:
        metadata:
          labels:
            kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: skypilot-local-queue

.. code-block:: bash

  NAMESPACE=skypilot
  RELEASE_NAME=skypilot
  helm upgrade --install $RELEASE_NAME skypilot/skypilot-nightly --devel \
    --namespace $NAMESPACE \
    --reuse-values \
    --set-file apiService.config=skypilot-config.yaml

> The configs above allows the API server to submit jobs using the local queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The config above allows the API server to submit jobs using the local queue.
```
